what is pcos?
Polycistic Ovary Syndrome(PCOS) is a condition that affects a woman's Hormone Levels.Women with PCOS produce higher-than normal amounts of male hormaones.
what causes pcos?
The Exact Cause of PCOS is Unknown ,however Genetics and Heredity play a role in Development.Excessive insulin may be a causative factor for PCOS.
what are the first signs of pcos?
The first signs of PCOS could be excessive hair growth usually on face,weight gain, acne or excessive hair growth on the face or body. This usually happens due to excess of male hormone (androgen). Many a times the first presenting symptom of PCOS might be infertility.
how is pcos diagnosed?
A thorough medical history is taken to understand if there are any symptoms of PCOS. A physical examination is carried out to know the presence and severity of any signs of PCOS. Blood tests are done to measure if there is any abnormality in the androgens, FSH, LH, thyroid hormones, blood sugar and fasting insulin levels. An ultrasound examination may show swollen ovaries or plenty of small follicles in the ovaries.
what are the symptoms of pcos?
Women with PCOS often experience infrequent or prolonged menstrual periods. They may also experience weight gain, acne or excessive hair growth on the face or body. This usually happens due to excess of male hormone (androgen). Many a times the first presenting symptom of PCOS might be infertility.
how is pcos treated?
PCOS doesn’t have a permanent cure, however it can be controlled. Lifestyle changes like low caloric diet, regular moderate exercise, getting adequate sleep, avoiding alcohol and smoking can help. Medications and nutritional supplements are available to enhance a good hormonal balance. Specific treatment focuses on managing individual concerns, such as infertility, hirsutism, acne or obesity is also advised to those who have PCOS.
is pcos life-threatening?
PCOS in itself is not life-threatening. However long term PCOS can be associated with insulin resistance which in turn may lead to an increased risk of diabetes, stroke, obesity, sleep apnoea, raised triglycerides, hypertension and cardiovascular disease.
what are the foods to avoid?
Women suffering from PCOS should avoid high glycemic foods in the form of refined carbohydrates and sugars. Diet should include high fiber, lean protein, adequate fats and vitamins and minerals.
how do you prevent pcos?
PCOS can be controlled rather than prevented by eating right, maintaining regular physical activity or yoga and avoiding alcohol and smoking.
what can I do on my own to lessen pcos symptoms?
Diet, exercise and lifestyle modification can make a huge difference in decreasing symptoms, spurring ovulation, losing weight and making you feel better than you’ve ever felt. The optimal Body Mass Index for fertility is 20-25. If your BMI falls above 30, the good news is that as little as 5-10 percent weight loss will significantly improve pregnancy rates. Getting active for 30 minutes at least three times a week is a great start. Nutrition tips include drinking lots of water and avoiding sugary drinks, opting for 100% whole grain, eating more unsaturated vegetable oils such as walnuts and avocado, choosing berries with antioxidants instead of sweets, eating plenty of greens rich in folate such as spinach, incorporating one ½ cup of beans per day into your diet and drinking whole milk (skim milk is associated with infertility). The real key is eating low carbs and ‘good’ carbs.